okay i think that we can we can start
okay I think that we can we can start
again good morning everyone in latin
america welcome to today's panel that we
call it
innovating colombian financial system
I'm gabriel bisama i lead international
I'm gabriel bisama I lead international
policy at the Stellar development
foundation
and today we have three experienced
panelists that
we are going to discuss the
opportunities and challenges of using
blockchain technology for cross-border
payments
and
specifically what we are going to
discuss is
how the use of blockchain technology and
stablecoins can expand the access and
usage of affordable financial services
and
how
actually they could provide a positive
impact to inclusion and economy by
contributing reducing the cost of
cross-border payments so i think that
cross-border payments so I think that
everyone here that connect to this panel
they know that the average cost of of
cross-border payments remains very high
right now
so it amounts to almost six percent
of the amount that you send
which is more than the double of the
sustainable development goals target
that is actually three percent
so so this high cost of remittances
payments have real world impacts on
individuals and small businesses
so for example high costs impact
migrants
seeking to some money home for for their
families also small businesses important
products from foreign suppliers
and non-profit organizations such as
eight organizations that are actually
there this person fans for
humanitarian aid
so blockchain technology and and the
responsible
design and use of of stable coins
could enable
more affordable cross-border payments
including remittances but also b2b
payments
that finalize in in seconds and and
actually cause fractions of a cent
mainly due to the reduction of of
intermediation so today we are going to
get into the details of on on a project
that we are doing in in colombia with
two ecosystem partners of of the Stellar
development foundation and also we
will have
diana from from the latin american
development bank to speak a little
bit about
how to embed financial education into
the consumer experience
but before getting into
the details and discussions with with
the panelists
i just want to
I just want to
give you a brief overview and intro to
the Stellar network for those who are
not familiar with with it
so Stellar is an open blockchain with
control capabilities for for issuers and
what does this mean so actually is is
a blockchain is a network that actually
gives on the one hand controls to asset
issuers that
ensures
safety and security of a permission or
closed network but at the same time it
leverage openness and interpretivity
that foster competition innovation and
inclusion
and the some examples of this just to
give you some some clear examples is is
aml and cft features and and clovax so
something that is called authorization
require is is a flag that
it could be
when you when an asset is your
issues an asset it could he could
make sure that that it has this aml and
cfd feature that
ensures that a financial entity when
he's distributing an asset
identifies who is the holder of that
asset
and this would gives controls to
actually to the issuer that
that aml and cft regulations are being
comply with so so we think that aml
and cft is important but also clawbacks
are important
so if an asset issuer such as a
regulated financial entity or a fintech
or a digital wallet or even a central
bank
that issues a cbdc
actually include this this flag on on
the asset gives the possibility of
to the issuer to recover the funds in
the event of a fraud for example but
this is not only relevant because of
in the case of fraudulent transactions
but also is relevant if for example
any a user
loss lose the the private keys so we
think that that clawbacks are really
important
and just to step back a little bit and
someday downstair it was established
in in 2014 and so so actually it's one
of the blockchains that is
most established and it's designed or it
was designed for for payments like the
main use case right now on on seller is
crossword payments but also
we are working in other use cases such
as cbdc's and using blockchain for
distributing humanitarian aid since
it launched the network process more
than 2.6 billion transactions
and currently is processing more than
six million transactions in a day-to-day
basis
the other piece that is important if
you would like to promote the use of
blockchain technology that could as
well promote financial inclusion we need
to make sure that the technology is
sustainable so
one of the things that
we would like to make sure is actually
that the technology yeah
it doesn't consume a lot of energy so we
are in in the next couple of weeks we
are going to to publish some research on
on the energy consumption on standard
and the data is is really promising so
that is something that we are we are
really happy
of
and
it is supported by the sera development
foundation which mission is to promote
the access and use of financial services
and actually the foundation is a
non-profit organization
and is is it's not a charity
actually it pays
taxes in the u.s specifically in
california and
the whole goal of the of of the
foundation is to support the development
of the network so with that i think that
of the network so with that I think that
we can we can start but before starting
actually this panel is is in led up
to the textured startup weekend
blockchain mexico city that is that
is going to happen next weekend and
actually this is an event that brings
together the the community in latin
america that is building solutions
in finance but but not only on Stellar
in any blockchain so actually we are
inviting those developers and startups
and fintechs and others that actually
are building products in latin america
and if you have a good idea to solve
any problem for for the target
audience that that we work in terms of
payments you are more than invited to
attend in person or even virtually
the the hackathon so actually there
you have the link to to sign up so
feel free to to do it and if you have
any questions you can you can ask me or
anki after after
after this this panel
so with that
i think that now we are ready to to
I think that now we are ready to to
start the the discussion
so first of all i would like to
so first of all I would like to
i would ask
I would ask
ivan to to introduce himself himself
and and also provide a brief overview of
unclapped and what is what is doing in
latin america and specifically in
colombia
hey gabriel how are you how are you all
thank you for
for joining us
yeah i am working in in a club
yeah I am working in in a club
here in
in latin america
we are we are connecting all latin
american countries to the
the Stellar network through
establishment we issue
establishment for every currency
every latin american currency so
people could access to these
global payment networks not only people
but also
any platform any business that
needs or that
finds an opportunity here to to transact
worldwide i like the speed and
worldwide I like the speed and
almost free cool who could get that
that that that tax is really really
fast so we are we are working we started
in argentina we we are
working in in colombia and also in peru
and we are under our road map is to to
work on on other countries
within this this latin america region so
that is that is what is what we do we
we are connecting
every single latin american country to
this
global payment network
thank you very much for that iman we
are going to get into the titles of what
unclub is doing
specifically in colombia but thank you
very much for the intro
i mean do you want to introduce yourself
I mean do you want to introduce yourself
and and provide a brief overview of
inclusive and
its products
absolutely thank you very much for
having us and it's great to be here with
yvonne and the Stellar team as well and
we're really excited about pursuing the
partnership to connect latime countries
and the cross-border payments space
weave inclusive you can see from our
name we are all about financial
inclusion and share that mission with
don klopsteller and the ecosystem
we are a hybrid fintech and regtech
platform where we provide a full stack
financial crimes compliance or
anti-money laundering platform that
enables all of the essential know your
customer know your business
anti-money laundering anti-fraud
controls transaction monitoring and the
like in one workflow and it's built to
enable both traditional financial
services companies compliance needs as
well as decentralized financial services
including blockchain ecosystems like the
Stellar network so we enable a number of
other anchors
across the platform globally to
ensure that there's a consistent
approach for know your customer
anti-money laundering with our global
framework we you can think of us as a
organ orchestration layer that brings
under one roof
is to do everything from identity
verification and validation
legal entity verification and validation
across the globe as other anchors and
nodes on the Stellar blockchain
originate their clients either retail
individuals or business clients that
need to have these essential kyc kyb
elements in place and then the
associated transaction monitoring and
other pieces of the anti-money
laundering stack
importantly we are very excited about
our partnership with Stellar because
they recognize
that there is a need for a consistency
of approach in the anti-money laundering
framework as many jurisdictions have
different rules governing we are built
to the global standards of the financial
action task force and many in our
company are actually former global
regulators whether they be with the us
or others by my part for example i spent
or others by my part for example I spent
the early part of my career at the u.s
treasury department working with
institutions like the fatf on anti-money
laundering frameworks so the advent of
the Stellar ecosystem and blockchain
enabling tools that that facilitate a
much faster efficient cross-border
payments ecosystem is exciting in that
regard but they all need compliance in
that regard we therefore are also an
anchor on the Stellar blockchain and and
the fintech side is we provide
connectivity for those payments into the
us traditional banking and payments
ecosystem ach payments wire payments and
the like so we can connect with yvonne's
team and the customers that they are
working with to facilitate cross-border
payments for household remittances small
business payments and the like and
enable on and off ramping for assets
that are transacted on the Stellar
blockchain for example like usdc that
may come inbound to counterparts to be
paid in the u.s where we can then
off-ramp to the u.s payment system and
then push or pull funds
using ach or wires and as well as
outbound flows as well so we we perform
two key functions we're a gateway
between traditional financial and
banking ecosystems in the united states
to be able to hold funds in accounts
with our partner banks in the u.s access
those ach and wire rails and then be
able to on and off ramp for payments
using the global Stellar blockchain
ecosystem and working with partners like
yvonne to really connect the latin
american
business and household community in
their cross-border payments needs and by
doing so we enable a very consistent
approach by also providing
some proprietary capabilities around
compliance backed digital identity
credentials for clients that come into
the ecosystem that provides great
efficiencies when we do kyc support
because of these often are very
redundant so we can issue and validate
compliance-backed verifiable digital
credentials for clients within that
ecosystem so as different nodes
originate their clients they can have
one kyc gateway and be able to have a
utility in the ecosystem while
importantly also protecting their
privacy and so the combination of these
compliance tools with the the blockchain
elements that associate payments flows
between digital assets and fiat assets
with this on and off ramp capability is
where we sit and we're excited about
participating in growing the ecosystem
and really driving cross-border payments
in a much more efficient but also secure
and compliant way
you very much for that amir and
inclusivis is a really good example on
on how financial entities are
connected to Stellar i actually
connected to Stellar I actually
care a lot about aml cfd and compliance
so I'm really happy to to to to hear
all of all that i mean
all of all that I mean
is going to to tell us today
so moving forward
diana do you want to introduce yourself
and provide a beef overview of like
half i think that most of the audience
half I think that most of the audience
would know the the cafe but it would
be great to hear that from you
yeah thank you gabriella thank you
for for the invitation to participate in
the webinar caf is a development back
the development bank of latin america
and we we are committed to improving
the quality of life of all latin
america's latin americans and caribbeans
and our cap actions promote sustainable
development and the integration of the
region and we support we provide
financial support and consulting
services to both the public and
private sectors in our shell shareholder
countries which are 20 countries
18 countries in latin america and the
caribbean
plus spain and portugal
in addition we generate a knowledge to
strengthen our public policies in latin
america and the caribbean
in order to improve the quality and
impact of the projects that we promote
i i actually work as the
I actually work as the
coordinator of the financial
inclusion program which is a program
within the private sector efforts
that cafe is is working with
all the countries in latin america
and the caribbean
thank you very much for that brief
overview diana and it's it's a
pleasure having you here as well and I'm
making sure that you are involved in the
project from a financial inclusion and
also from a financial education
standpoint that is that is something
that that that is that is really
important for us so
after this quick introductions i think
after this quick introductions I think
that we can start with with the panel
and we can get into the details on on
the project that we are doing
in colombia and just to give you a brief
overview of that
what we are doing with with unclap
and amp inclusive is try to
under pile up project try to gather data
on how much is the cost of sending
funds across water using the Stellar
blockchain and
we we are really happy to see the
results after that in in terms of of the
pricing and and the potential savings
that actually someone sending money from
from the us and someone receiving money
from colombia can can can make
use in using blockchain so
actually with this background i have the
actually with this background I have the
first question for for you
amid is actually
what do you think that are the benefits
and opportunities of using blockchain
and stablecoins for cross-border
payments for someone who is living in
the u.s and
and is willing to send money to latin
america for example to to colombia
thank you very much for the question
the core really comes down to three
benefits
cost efficiency
as well as security right the ability
to leverage stable coins like usdc
over the Stellar blockchain enable near
real-time payments between anchors on
the blockchain on the ecosystem and
those anchors connect directly to their
clients and those clients can be
individuals that hold wallets they're
operating with a native application to a
fintech provider in that home country
life inclusive is doing for
businesses and others in the us and
onclop is doing across latam the
ability to on-ramp to usdc from local
fiat currencies or quite frankly any
other asset that's issued and transacted
whether they be stable coins or all
coins on Stellar provides a tremendous
amount of efficiency so you can go from
fiat to stable coin back to fiat in many
ways much faster than you can send an
international wire payment between two
intermediaries that are then
representing multiple banks or others
between the ultimate client sender and
ultimate beneficiary recipient and so
you get both the the the speed and
efficiency associated with that the cost
efficiencies that are therefore enabled
can streamline this because when you go
through multiple intermediaries multiple
correspondent banks with three five
seven plus day settlement times you not
only lose time to get that what what
may be a small dollar payment for a
household or even a large transaction
value payment for a non-profit that is
trying to provide
organizations in need for humanitarian
relief or corporates and legal entities
trying to make payroll payments supply
chain payments vendor payments and
others you get a speed and efficiency as
well as a cost advantage
lastly and importantly the blockchain's
underlying attributes give us certain
capabilities from a security and
compliance perspective the commitment to
risk and compliance within the context
of the Stellar ecosystem helps
benefit that while because we provide
essential kyc kyb elements know your
customer know your business elements and
therefore issue unique digital
credentials what that enables is that in
individual context in those countries
when they onboard a client an individual
and they go through the identity
verification document non-documentary
background sanction screening processes
many of these are very piecemeal and we
can consolidate them through the
inclusive ecosystem they it we can issue
these credentials and now any node that
is therefore needing to validate an
individual or a business that's been
onboarded and run through that kyc kyb
process can do so near instantaneously
and that is a significant hurdle both
from an efficiency and cost perspective
because anti-money laundering elements
tend to be expensive and tend to be very
redundant so this provides a
an
answer to the redundant applications of
aml and kyc while also creating security
by enabling these verifiable credentials
that protect underlying privacy
information whereas in the traditional
financial services context when a sender
sends money through multiple
intermediaries to a recipient in a
foreign country you have to disclose
underlying account and personal
information through that payment chain
and one is able to do so now con
in in adherence to those compliance
rules without having to attach the the
very underlying privacy information and
because the ledger
is immutable you can search both
transactions from an anti-fraud
anti-money laundering perspective as
well as ensure that there's no illicit
activity that's happening in the system
so the immutability of the ledger the
transparency that it provides while also
cr creating a privacy protection layer
is inherently part and parcel of
blockchain technology when combined in
this ecosystem like through the Stellar
development foundation support of the
Stellar network and companies like
like on klopp and inclusive now you get
connectivity between asset issuance
payments and the interconnectivity
between stable coins and fiat currencies
in multiple markets with the kyc
anti-money laundering layer so net
result is you get security speed and
efficiency
that's great from a colombian
perspective so actually someone who is
receiving
funds from the u.s to colombia
ivan what do you think that are the main
benefits of using
blockchain and also stable coins for
cross-border payments
ah the the benefits amit has has
saw a lot of the benefits and i
deeply agree on what he said
but
i see here i see that this technology
I see here I see that this technology
the honor from services that we provide
the whole ecosystem and the protection
that tools that
inclusive is bringing to the to the to
the network allows not only to
receive
to receive money for remittance but
also to small business to
transact
worldwide i mean
worldwide I mean
this is this is technology that not only
allow us to
help those people that couldn't
or
doesn't have access to
to financial services or are paid
too much for for getting money from
abroad but also to small businesses
to start offering their products and
service to to other countries
in in colombia the the on like
others com other countries of the region
of the latin region argentina and others
the necessity
is clear
because of
the lack of
formal jobs there are a huge
cash network that
probably and that's
also
something that we should work on
it's
it's it's something that
hurts the the people economy
maybe
if you are not if you don't have the
enough financial education and that is
where we want to
to to work here
maybe you don't realize
how much how are you
are you losing using
traditional rights or maybe you are
used to
use that rights but using this
technology using this this network
it could benefit people not only to
get get money from a relative in
the u.s faster and cheaper
but also to
to start working on their
personal economy i mean how to use money
personal economy I mean how to use money
how to save how
to how to how how you could offer
your personal services like i don't know
your personal services like I don't know
you could you could go through
i don't know a ternary or to a
I don't know a ternary or to a
live streamer a gamer
and this phrase this blockchain race
allow people to
start transacting worldwide but using
our domestic currency
or or the currency you want
but at the end of the day if you
when you need to
consume and use local financial services
for local payments or or whatever you
need there is there is a way to
to interact with between the the digital
network and the
the local financial system and that
that is what we do we
will represent
the local
currency and allow people to move from
one world to the other world
easily
so
i think I'm I'm pretty sure that
I think I'm I'm pretty sure that
there is a
this is a next
next job charter
in our
in our region when when talking about
financial services and on financial
opportunities for people but
i i also
I I also
like i look i also want to highlight the
like I look I also want to highlight the
the benefits
that small businesses
or or freelancers or
self-employed people
could be benefit
of this entire network not only people
who are receiving money from abroad
but also to
to develop your economy as a and
integrate
yourself and provide your services
worldwide and i think that is huge
worldwide and I think that is huge
probably and I'm sure we have to
we we have to
work really hard on financial education
that is a must to have here
but this technology and this ecosystem
have a lot to to to
to do with people and as soon as the
people start
seeing and feeling the benefits of all
this network
sooner or later they will become more
familiar with it and
of course that that is a process and we
start trying to
demonstrate that using this this
blockchain rails for for transacting and
for
using your money on
and accessing financial services it's
the first step
for a huge other opportunities in a
next few years
this is really interesting thank you
very much for that ivana and i think
very much for that ivana and I think
that you touch upon different
issues that i would like to ask to to
issues that I would like to ask to to
the anna in terms of personal finance
and financial education so we we have
spoken a lot about benefits and
opportunities
but in this context we're actually in
order to
send money for example from the u.s to
colombia you need maybe a smartphone you
need connectivity
how how do you think that financial
education and financial literacy and
also digital literacy is relevant for
for someone who is receiving money in in
colombia and and how would you approach
actually
financial education in this context
yes thank you gabriel i think that
yes thank you gabriel I think that
we need to think to think first
what is financial education
because i mean
because I mean
just traditionally financial
education programs
have been built on the assumption that
transferring information to
financial consumers about how to use
financial products would lead to better
choices
and improved financial health however
evidence from numerous impact
evaluations
over the past decade suggests that
this assumption is flawed and there
is a growing body of evidence showing
that interventions designed using
principles from with behavioral
economics are more likely to improve
people's money management behavior
than other interventions so
financial inclusion we we we at cap
are working on programs on the
improvement on financial inclusion and
we see that
this requires financially capable
customers who actively use products for
their benefits
and the ultimate goal of financial
education programs is to help develop
financially capable customers
those with the with the attitudes the
knowledge the skills and behaviors to
make financial decisions to improve
their lives
and there is also evidence that shows
that higher levels of financial
capabilities are related to greater
levels of financial well-being or
financial
health
through financial attitudes skills and
behavior such as a savings behavior
previous own experience with the
financial sector comparison among
different financial institutions before
acquiring a new financial product
personal participation or involvement in
the in the in the financial decisions of
the household among others so we see
that for example this project
could benefit a lot
from
incorporating
financial education from this
behavior perspective i mean taking
behavior perspective I mean taking
into account the needs of the the
customer needs and their behavior and
incorporating these kind of notches
that will will help the the customer
or the remittance receiver to improve
their savings behavior for example
so we we see this as a as a
very important opportunity to
incorporate these financial
education evidence into into into
into this this product in in colombia
yeah i totally agree with that i mean
yeah I totally agree with that I mean
if actually you
you need to make sure that
when you approach financial education
you can you you can help
individuals and and adults to
to improve their financial
capabilities and and therefore their
financial health by by changing behavior
so
i think that this is this is the the
I think that this is this is the the
approach that evidence tell us and
I'm happy to to hear that the latin
american development bank is working on
that as well and and can also contribute
to to do this to this project so
moving forward in terms of
not only what is going on in colombia
but but also what is going on in in
the region i would like to
the region I would like to
to bail on on the answer on on that amit
previously
made in terms of
of the offering of other products in
in latin america so the question that
i have for you i mean is whether of
I have for you I mean is whether of
inclusive right now is is planning to
expand the offering of of financial
services in latin america in addition to
to this pilot that that is working
with with angle app
so if if you want to elaborate on that
that would be great
sure thank you very much yes the
short answer to that is yes and and in a
couple different and distinct ways
one is we want to make sure that first
and foremost that we can provide the
essential
financial crimes compliance aml toolkit
so that any organization that's building
within the context of the Stellar
ecosystem has a
you know truly a plug-and-play solution
for their aml and kyc and kyb needs and
that there's ecosystem efficiencies
built in with some of the capabilities
that we provide in particular with the
digital digitally verifiable
credentials
that
equally applied to individuals and small
businesses like yvonne said
in particular it's not just households
and individuals that are trying to get
access to to financial services but
also small businesses that really
is the engine of global job growth
certainly the case in the us certainly
the case in latam and if we can create
more enablements for them in two or
three distinct ways one
especially in markets that have a number
of different macro economic humanitarian
or other considerations to review
one is whether they be capital controls
high inflation rates and the like
individuals at the household level and
organizations want to know that when
they hold value that that value is
secure and so to the extent that we can
provide connectivity for
organizations within the context of the
lat time community like unclop
and others that can connect individuals
to their therefore hold value in a u.s
account that provides some stability
with respect to that the the the insured
accounts that we can provide through
some of our bank partners the second is
that there are a number of organizations
including and built within the context
of the Stellar ecosystem that are also
providing savings and or other higher
yield account structures so higher
yield usdc
for example where organizations and
individuals can now hold value in much
more stable ways that provide a little
bit higher yield than say for example
non-interest bearing or other accounts
that that might happen the third is in
the payment side and obviously that's a
core value proposition with the Stellar
ecosystem driving down the cost of
payments but really folks really want to
be able to transfer value securely and
in near real time and while some of the
organizations may be legal entities
corporate enterprises are less concerned
about the multi-day settlement they just
want to ensure that there is a a secure
way to send value they certainly want to
minimize the market and other volatility
characteristics that some of the
alternative coins offer and this is
where stable coins like usdc play a very
very large value having interoperability
into local fiat systems is the fourth
space and congrats to the to the
group and yvonne and and others like him
that are trying to provide the ability
to connect fiat in local currency
either as a payout or as a pay in to a
stable coin ecosystem that now is
interoperable and then fifthly i i
interoperable and then fifthly I i
should say is that what we are working
to expand within within the context
of the Stellar community is obviously
not only is there interconnectivity
between latam and the us but there's
greater greater interconnectivity
between latam and africa africa and
europe africa and the us and you now
have organizations that are globally
engaged we ourselves are a
decentralized company we have
individuals based all over the us but
also in europe and elsewhere and these
small businesses now have the ability in
a digitizing economy even if you're five
people 10 people to have individual
contractors subcontractors
vendors suppliers counterparts all over
the world and that requires an ecosystem
that is community bank like but in a
global in a global and peer-to-peer
functioning way that's exciting so as we
have small businesses that enable an
individual in rural africa or in europe
or latam to transact just as an
inter-company
set of financial services or they're
transacting with their beneficiaries
vendors suppliers and other
counterparties in their ecosystem like
gamers like subcontractors like
freelancers like small medium
merchants and the like
operating in these marketplaces those
marketplaces want to secure value
transfer ecosystem and they want to do
so compliantly so those are the four or
five ways that we are looking to expand
these services beyond just compliance
thank you very much for that
that is impressive to to be honest and
and i look forward to hearing more in
and I look forward to hearing more in
a couple of months ivan do you
want to
share some details on on the pilot that
that actually you are working with with
inclusive and and also we are
we are
in a phase where where at some point
we are going to work as well with the
latin american development bank and
basically if you want to also provide
some some details on on the road map
on in colombia in the short and medium
term that would be great
okay yeah
yeah we
we are working together with inclusive
on build and building
bringing a solution
for remittances okay between us and
colombia
but
people need to
understand that what we are bringing at
the end of the day is
infrastructure
so
all other companies or
developers
can build
solutions on top of this race but we
what we are doing is just
building brands compliance race and of
course
what we are doing today is working hand
by hand with local regulators within
within colombia because of its highly
necessary to them
for
to get our best understanding of what we
do and what
how this this this blockchain race could
help not only people but also the
entire
financial industry
providing
more
financial products
and services to the people so
what we do is
bring in
bringing services bringing
bring bringing infrastructure okay so
not only us today we we are working
to to to bring a a remittances platform
for colombians to get get money from
their relatives in the us or send money
to the us
but
once we we can prove that this rate this
infrastructure is compliant is it's
it's huge for for for the standard
traditional
remittances services much faster and
cheaper for people
we we will start working on
letting they know that it is an
infrastructure that any other
company within colombia or within any
other country because we are a huge
network
can bring products financial services
on top of this infrastructure and
that is is what we are working today
we are
still not
life in in colombia because of we need
to have a
huge understanding of
of what we do
with regulators and
of course we we are we are working
together with them and we are we are
working to to
to run the project within the
the local regulation sandbox
for for
for them to have the the best
understanding of what we do
and of course as
as as bigger and as a robust
the project could be if we if we work
together on this of course the the
whole
industry
will be
will get the benefits of this
infrastructure
i assume i think that that probably in
I assume I think that that probably in
the in the next month we could launch
the platform
but again
I'm a technical guy and and i
i insist that i will i would love to see
I insist that I will I would love to see
other companies
within colombia or u.s to start thinking
financial solutions to build on top
of these blockchain rails
we are working to to prove
that is that it represents a huge
benefit for people
but
please
those companies or developers that are
seeing this this panel
please
have in mind that you can you could you
could bring your solutions on top of
this network so
that is that is what we are doing
still working with regulators to
make pretty sure that we are okay and we
we we have the grant to to
to have the because the
the the local ecosystem with this with
this technology and as soon as we we
could move forward you know
in a few
months we will launch the
remittances
platform but and start working on on
other
other solutions or other fine financial
services
like local payments or
worldwide payments
whatever
i i hope not being
I I hope not being
me who brings those solutions but other
companies to build on top
of the infrastructure we
are bringing and
that's that's the
history and
I'm really excited on what we
what we are doing and and of course
having a huge partners like the like
like the caf and the Stellar develop
foundation it's it's huge and I'm
really optimistic on that we will
make
really noise on the on the
on the latin american
economist
and people economy
thank you very much for that ivan i
think that you mentioned something that
is really important that is actually
working together with regulators so
actually these public private
partnerships just to make sure that
that you can not actually
the technology not only the technology
but actually the use cases are are
developed in in in different kind of of
economies so building on on that answer
diana from a development
perspective from a financial inclusion
perspective
how do you think that actually
regulators and policy makers can
design a landscape that is
that would promote
the use of of the the responsible use of
technology for
for bringing more more inclusion
so so so do you have some some thoughts
on on that
yes i think that i mean working
yes I think that I mean working
together with the regulator and
trying to be i mean part of the
trying to be I mean part of the
regulatory sandboxes in in each
country i think it's it is it is very
country I think it's it is it is very
important as as evangelist mentioned
the work that he's been doing with
the financial superintendency
in colombia and the and the regulatory
sandbox is is very important and i think
sandbox is is very important and I think
that
these partnerships are are are key
in order i mean for for for for
in order I mean for for for for
the
the companies to align to to the
regulation
and and also for the regulators because
they learn a lot on the these these
innovative business models and
they adore and they can adjust the
regulations to that financial
innovation so i think it is it is
innovation so I think it is it is
very important that is a win-win
from from the both both sides
and i also think that
and I also think that
also incorporating these these this
aspect that we were talking about
on financial education and consumer
protection is key and for the regulator
this is this is very important this is
this is not only important
to to the consumer but but also from the
regulation point of view to
incorporate these financial
education and and the impact of the the
usage of the product on the consumer
protection and and also the financial
health of the customer
yeah i totally agree with that approach
yeah I totally agree with that approach
and what actually you you have said i
have the i think that we are running out
have the I think that we are running out
of time so i have the last question for
of time so I have the last question for
for all of you maybe we can start with
with amit and then we can continue with
evan and and then with diana
that actually we have been
speaking a lot about cross-border
payments and remittances and b2b
payments
what other use cases
you
envision
that could be built not only on
blockchain but actually in the financial
innovation space
that that would promote access and
usage of
financial services and and and
actually contributing to those who are
in informal economy to to start
operating in the formal economy in latin
america
so i mean do you want to to go first
so I mean do you want to to go first
sure there are a couple and obviously
thematically we've touched on some of
them already the the cross-border
remittance use case is not only very
important as it relates to household
remittances and those small dollar
payments that individuals are making
as some folks have have opined and
there's a lot of data out of the world
bank imf and elsewhere that showed that
especially outbound remittances from the
u.s to many latin countries and
elsewhere in the in the world
constitute very high percentage of even
those countries gdp and the longevity
for those households to actually get
funds from from the united states so the
income economy if you will is just
massive i think it's worth
massive I think it's worth
worth re-emphasizing small business
payments because like i said the the
payments because like I said the the
global engine of job growth is small
businesses the number of small medium
enterprises and micro enterprises is
really responsible for 90 plus percent
of global job growth and this comes back
to
the the changing nature of the job
landscape where there are more
contractors subcontractors freelancers
doing work interconnected with companies
all over the the globe that need a
much more secure and and innovative
financial services space small
businesses are categorically seen as
high risk by many traditional lenders so
the not only the ability for those
individuals that are themselves small
businesses as a contractor or freelancer
or what we call an independent
worker but also those small businesses
are competing for lending products
and the extension of credit to just grow
start and grow their businesses and so
the the that's another product that that
continues to be formulated within the
context of fintechs
as well as in blockchain enabled
ecosystem so small dollar lending small
business financing is massive to
enable these companies to start and to
grow and these can be enabled very
easily in the same payments mechanisms
that these blockchain networks
provide like with Stellar and many of
them need the appropriate due diligence
to ensure that they've got the the
background legitimacy and and
effectively the worthiness to get that
that those products and services
and then
the the third and fourth i would say is
the the third and fourth I would say is
while we
often talk about the the inclusion
aspects within the context of of private
industry the non-profit and
humanitarian development sector cannot
be overlooked here more and more of
organizations are realizing that being
able to donate in non-fiat assets is
attractive we look at the conflict in
ukraine within 48 72 hours the millions
and millions of crypto assets that were
donated on behalf of
many ngos and individuals around the
planet to support the cause in ukraine
and this is not a one-off there are many
organizations many countries frontier
markets those in conflict facing
crises that quite frankly it's much
easier for them to get a wallet and have
tokens
deposited and transferred to their
wallet than it would be for them to get
any kind of fiat asset because of the
absence of banking systems especially
when you think about refugees and others
which you're talking about tens of
millions of individuals worldwide
that that don't have access to them and
then you add the billion or so people on
the planet that are just not born with
an id well no bank traditional financial
services company sees them as a
legitimate party in the ecosystem and
this is where not only the blockchain
from a compliance perspective digital
identity perspective pays huge value but
then the ability to then tokenize value
and create an ecosystem where you can
send value to them directly
in a way that's secure and then the
final piece i will just say because it's
final piece I will just say because it's
a little outside of the financial
inclusion mandate but equally relevant
the financial services ecosystem and
payments ecosystem is in radical need of
innovation anyway and that pays
tremendous dividends to corporate
enterprises imagine the hundreds of
billions of dollars that are transacted
between corporates you know on a
daily monthly and yearly basis to be
able to tokenize that financing be able
to do it near real time and securely
takes a lot of noise and rent seeking
behavior that is in the traditional
financial space with the number of
financial intermediaries that blockchain
ecosystems like Stellar can really
provide and so i think that that
provide and so I think that that
provides a much more inclusive secure
economy and and i think that's where the
economy and and I think that's where the
future will be
that's a great answer ivan i know that
that's a great answer ivan I know that
we are we have only a couple of minutes
so
if you want to
yeah i i think i think more use cases
yeah I think I think more use cases
could be local payments
because of
there are a lot of people that probably
do not transact worldwide but
they they they need and they deserve to
have a way to use their money locally
so
it doesn't matter if they they they want
to transact worldwide but using your
money locally so it's also a great use
case to use digital money
and also what am i saying b2b
and also what am I saying b2b
b2b payments
and b2c payments i imagine
and b2c payments I imagine
in a few years
having go into a market
and paying with with my phone with
with a cure and the the the merchant
will
will have the money in their wallet
instantly at no cost and I'm paying the
the same way and i imagine i imagine
the same way and I imagine I imagine
that local payments
b2b payments and b2 b2c payments
yeah totally agree with that diana
what do you think
yeah very very quick i i think more
yeah very very quick I think more
on the on the financial innovation
perspective i see more
perspective I see more
consumer-centric
approaches or more consumer-centric
products
that that
takes into into account i mean in the in
takes into into account I mean in the in
the design are the needs of the of the
different segments of population for
example women
products that are that have this
gender perspective for example
and also that that includes
one thing that i think it is it is
one thing that I think it is it is
important and and and and i didn't touch
important and and and and I didn't touch
in my in in the in the first question
which is the the the promotion of
digital literacy because i mean as
digital literacy because I mean as
as a part of of the financial education
programs
is it is it is important to to pay
special attention to foster the
digital skills and knowledge of the of
the population and and and the most
vulnerable populations who are the
ones that that traditionally
have been excluded from the financial
system and also lacks
these digital capabilities and it
is important to
to to to close this gap and and not
open another another gap as as we have
on financial capabilities
yeah yeah totally agree with that as
well so thank you very much for for
joining this panel we have heard
actually what are the benefits and and
opportunities of of
of using the blockchain technology
and stablecoins and we have
we have heard that
security
reduction of costs mitigating aml and
cft trace abilities and our and our
benefit that i that i i got here but
benefit that I that I got here but
also helping or contributing to
small businesses to transition from the
informal economy to the formal economy
but also in terms of not challenges but
but we also need to consider
financial literacy and financial
education in terms of of making sure
that those receiving funds in a
cross-border payments scenario have all
the all the knowledge and all the
capability in order to to use the
financial services you know in in in a
good way so evidence tell us that
actually you can you can play around
with different variables or elements in
order to make sure that the impact of
that financial education schemes are
are greater so so with that
we are
finalizing the the panel i would like
finalizing the the panel I would like
to thank you for
for participating today and
and I'm looking forward to continue this
conversation in in the nearly future so
so thank you very much again for for
the time
thank you